Scrambling for Safety 6

There are links to some of the PowerPoint presentations on FIPR's site
at http://www.fipr.org/sfs6.html

I won't guarantee the accuracy of my notes, not least because my
handwriting and hearing are both rather suspect.  Also, some of my
notes are rather cursory, with little context to them.  Sorry, they
were written as aides-memoires for a Consultation Response, not for
the more general dissemination they might be about to get.  All
"quotes" are likely to be paraphrased, not verbatim.

Comments to Owen Blacker <owen@stand.org.uk>, Queries to the speakers
themselves  :P

:::::::::::::::::::
 Table of contents
:::::::::::::::::::

[1] Introduction and background; Simon Davies, Privacy International
[2] The current régime of data retention and access; Duncan Campbell
[3] The consultation documents; Simon Watkin, Home Office
[4] EU actions; Philippe Gérard, European Commission
[5] Oversight landscape relating to Human Rights; Prof Douwe Korff
[6] Q&A session with the above speakers
    (Break)
[7] Legality of retention; Dan Cooper, Covington & Burling
[8] Technical and economic feasibility; Roland Perry, LINX
[9] The European landscape; Tony Bunyan, Statewatch
[a] Purposes of data retention; Richard Clayton, FIPR
[b] Q&A session with the second set of speakers


:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [1] Introduction and background
 Simon Davies, Privacy International
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

There are two key issues here -- trust and legality.

Extrapolating figures from APIG and elsewhere imply that 100m phone
records are pulled every year.

From a consumer PoV, this isn't a cost issue so, unlike the LINX and
ISPA and so on, PI are less interested in that aspect.

PI would argue that it is ~not~ a basis for legality that the intent to
pursue serious crime (etc) should allow access to these data and
metadata.  Dan Cooper's legal opinion, later, backs this up, in Simon
Davies's opinion.

Oversight!  The Interception Commissioner, despite his importance (and,
to be fair, extenuating circumstances) cannot attend today.  [I didn't
make any notes about it here, but I'm pretty sure it was here that he
mentioned the correspondence he's been having with Sir Swinton Thomas:
http://makeashorterlink.com/?U1FC21794 -- all very entertaining...]

PI have just launched a campaign: "Know your data". See their website:
http://makeashorterlink.com/?P21D62794 [I'm a little concerned at how
this seems like a fun threat by way of costing telcos and ISPs quite a
bit of dosh, which isn't really A Good Thing, imho.]

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [2] The current régime of data retention and access
 Duncan Campbell (by video, as he couldn't make it)
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

There has been an "exponential" increase in the use of surveillance
[something illegible].  For every one cellphone, there are now over 100
requests per annum for comms data. [That really is what I wrote].
These are all under the DPA. because RIP powers are not yet extant.
[Duncan was subsequently corrected by Simon Watkin, as these aren't
"under the DPA", but rather under other legislation, see the
consultation docs, and the CSPs balance requests against their DPA
responsibilities.]

Most Net-related access requests atm are seizures of PCs for
kiddieporn.

Some companies store cellsite data for seven years -- including BT
Cellnet / O2

Enquiries often also include credit card numbers used for PAYG topups
and the IMEI numbers of phones connecting

DPA régime [sic] is generally not bad, because the system is rigidly
setup, with detailed forms and SPoCs [single points of contact, in the
unlikely event any of you didn't already know the acronym].  Audit
trails, transparency and accountability could be better.  Because
lawyers are often unaware of the system, suspects don't always get all
the information they should, as the defence doesn't know to ask for
these metadata, for example.

Voda and Orange keep data for 1 year or 6 months. T-Mobile destroy
after 3 months.

And estimated 150.000 to 200.000 requests per annum means that large
depts are required and requests are often serviced automatically by
Business Applications.

"BT Link" has been operating since the mid-90s to send information on
request.  Cell networks have similar systems.  The protocols used are
often risible -- one [nameless] company uses a "secret" email address
and, if the request is properly formatted, a response is generated
automatically and sent to another "secret" email address; all in the
clear.  This could, clearly, be a breach of the companies' duties of
care under the DPA.

Bugging is another area of explosive growth.  This growth is possible,
in part, because the introduction of a RIP régime makes people think
the system is "better".

It's very easy to buy mobile phones specifically set up to be planted
as bugs.  One of Duncan's slides [Ian was running PowerPoint in time
with Duncan's VHS presentation, très surreal] listed
http://www.mobilephonebug.co.uk/ -- easy to make the phones, easy to
buy (prices shown on the slide read £398,75 for one model and £543,75
for another).  It became very evident, in one bugging case, of the
source of the intercepts, as the line got dropped and, calling back,
the tapes played an apology from Orange for not being able to connect
the call!  Duncan joked about the govt having a deal with Orange, as it
always seems to be Orange who are the telco in these cases.

There's a clear lack of accountability and transparency here.  The
National Crime Squad, in pticlr, seem to favor using planted mobile
phone bugs, as this neatly evades the ban on wiretap evidence being
adduced as evidence in court.

The DG of NCIS, even, has been accused of lying on these forms.  Yet
another flaw in these processes -- they're, effectively, rubberstamped.
[The implication here was that the DG had been misled by his
underlings, I think]

Introduction of RIP powers will change things but it's important to
remember that companies cannot be trusted not to automate systems for
their convenience, not to give more information than they should --
being "helpful", and not to fail to erase data when they should etc.
[There's an interesting adage on UK Crypto recently about a hotel CCTV
tape, see http://makeashorterlink.com/?R1D865794 for info]

In five years, we've gone from none to thousands of phone requests.
Extrapolating this, we'll see a similar massive expansion in Net
surveillance, when the RIP régime is introduced.

With cell site data, normally, paging messages (whereareyou pings)
should only go out to locate phones on initiation of a call and,
possibly, at the end but we believe this is not the case, in order to
allow the collation of cell site histories.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [3] The consultation documents
 Simon Watkin, Home Office
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Simon's slides are online at http://www.fipr.org/sfs6/watkin.ppt

[I made very poor notes of Simon's presentation, as I'm quite familiar
with the consultations already.]

He reiterated the necessity and proportionality principles.  And that
Part I, Chapter II of RIP is not yet in force, despite newspaper
assumptions to the contrary.

Despite the appearance of last year's Snoopers' Charter, it was "always
the intention" only to let ~specific~ public authorities have access to
the data to which they have an ~explicit~ need.

"SPoCs add Quality Control".  "All public officials engaged in this
process should go through the [SPoC] training".

Restriction of access by purpose had been assumed, apparently.  Perhaps
(qv the consultation paper), individual authorities could be tied down
to specific types of criminality.

Reiterated "Double Lock" principle [qv consultation]

Retention background
 - ATCSA
 - Voluntary vs Mandatory Code of Practice
 - Must specify maximum retention period
 - Purpose for retention must match the purpose for access

Sunset clause
 - ability to impose a mandatory CoP ceases two years after
   the passage of the Act [ATCSA]: 2003-12-13
 - the sunset clause can be extended but only if the new clause
   is introduced before the expiry of the original one.

Issues emerged:
 - APIG report [we should get a copy of this]
 - All the powers in legacy legislation [not the DPA, despite Duncan]
 - Multi-agency SPoCs -- RIP's single-agency rqmt was intended as
   a DPA-like container, to reduce the amount that people's data
   were spread around, to protect HRA rights.  APIG suggested a SPoC
   body, as it were.  HO are looking for public opinion to sway it
   either way [it's ironic that we, rightly, bitched about the amount
   that RIP leaves to secondary legislation and one of the few things
   in the Act itself will almost certainly need amending ;) ]
 - Definition of comms data types
 - "Predictive fishing"
 - Subject access requests
 - Openness and transparency of oversight -- HO are aware that Sir
   Swinton Thomas's public profile needs raising. [See a point in the
   Q&A session below...]
 - State of the "technology war"

The HO does wish RIP to be the sole régime, apparently.  [Simon
mentioned sth about how difficult it would be to repeal all prior
powers, some of which are only in common law, but I think we should
recommend that new primary legislation should just repeal all other
powers implicitly, without having to enumerate them; I don't think that
would be unconstitutional. Worth looking into, anyways. Can someone
who's more anally acquainted with British constitutional law than me
advise me, please? :) ]

Issues around retention [Simon was rather blasé about preservation,
qvb]
 - Bespoke systems for retention => COST!
 - Industry hesitant to volunteer
   - Information Commissioner's advice
   - Possibility of DPA prosecutions
   - CSPs are potentially a quasi-public authority under the auspices
     of the HRA -- Simon committed the HO to issuing whatever we call
     amicus briefs in any cases that would ensue here
   - Potential of loss of business to more privacy-aware competitors
   - Would prefer to be mandated than to volunteer [I think]

Issues on Data Protection
 - APIG
 - Timed to precede consultation [I forget ~what~ was so timed]
   - Call for HO to drop retention plans
   - Ignores LEAs' case
   - Call for negotiations on Data Preservation
 - ... [Interesting slide, didn't note it all down]

Possibly ways fwd
 - DPA issues by s28 of DPA
 - ... [Interesting slide, didn't note it all down]

Looking to return to Parliament with a new version of last summer's SI.

** CONSULTATION DEADLINE IS 2003-06-03, only three weeks away!! **

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [3] EU actions
 Philippe Gérard, European Commission
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Philippe's slides are online at http://www.fipr.org/sfs6/gerard.ppt
[I was very disappointed that the guy had to dash back on the Eurostar
straightaway, as I'd've liked to have talked to him some more.  Ian was
very impressed that he came along, though, at the drop of a hat.
Really good speaker, though.]

Directive 2002/58/EC on Privacy and Electronic Comms (replaced
97/66/EC)

Reports:
 - Eighth Implementation report COM 200(338), dated 2002-12-03:
   http://makeashorterlink.com/?K5B346694 -- requested greater clarity
 - JAI EU Council of Conclusions of 2002-12-19 on IT and
   Organised Crime -- should comply with the DP principles of ECHR
 - Data Protection Working Party opinion 5/2002

Most national laws and plans are currently inoperative.

Things are limited by a conflict between the Third and First Pillars of
the EU (intergovernmental cooperation and Community law, respectively)

Main sources of EU law:
 - General principles of Community law, like proportionality,
   including Giscard d'Éstaing's Constitutional Convention
 - ECHR Articles 8 and 10 (privacy, free expression, resp)
 - EU Charter on Fundamental Rights -- Art 8 is DP [qv]
   http://europa.eu.int/comm/justice_home/unit/charte/index_en.html
   = site; charter itself = http://makeashorterlink.com/?Z32421694
 - "General" DP Directive 95/46/EC and "specific" DP Directive
   2002/58/EC

2002/58/EC:
 - Art 5 = Confidentiality
 - Art 4 = security
 - Art 6 = rules on traffic data
 - Art 15(1) = "Public order derogations"

NB: Data retention measures are neither required nor authorised by the
Directive. If a Member State adopts any such measures, they must be in
line with the Directive.

Art 15(1) has two tests:
 - Data retention and the internal market
   - Proportionality (cost burden for operators)
   - Avoid (as much as poss) a patchwork of local laws
 - Data retention and Human Rights
   - For specific, listed purposes
   - Necessity, appropriateness and proportionality in a democratic
     society --> ECHR
   - Adequate safeguards
   - Legislative measures (so no voluntary code of practice, Simon
     Watkin was shaking his head here)
   - For a limited time period

EURISPA sees no need for data retention.  The Article 29 Data
Protection Working Party has an opinion too -- qv [yes, that's really
how my notes read, sorry!]

He is philippe.gerard@cec.eu.int

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [5] Oversight landscape relating to Human Rights
 Prof Douwe Korff
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Human rights activist and Data Protection lawyer, in that order.
No slides.

Dislikes voluntary codes, where one can do something that would be
unlawful, so long as one complies with a voluntary CoP.

Very disdainful [as was Dan Cooper of Covington & Burling] of Simon
Watkins' disparagement of the difference between retention and
preservation.  Retention => keep information in case it's useful
down the line (see First Pillar).  Preservation => the data are being
kept anyways, just provide lawful access on request.  Data destroyed
when the CSP no longer needs it (see Directives and Criminal law)

EU laws are framed in the context of "people have rights, States can
only interfere with them under certain principles":
 - Interferement must be based on a law
 - Interferement must serve a specific, legitimate purpose
 - Interferement must be proportionate and necessary -- in the
   individual case, not generically.
 - There must be procedural safeguards (generally judicial ones)

Prof disagrees that Parliament ~can~ [legally] decide on blanket
retention, as the third point above requires that retention (etc)
be proportionate and necessary ~in the individual case~, not more
generally, as an anti-terrorist measure, for example

Also, see Working Party document 64 (dated October 2002): "in a
specific case"

2003-01-29 Working Party opinion on billing data would seem to concur
again -- "the general push of Home Office legisliation [and EU security
apparatus more widely] may well fall foul of EU Human Rights laws."

Prof concerned about openness.  Thinks there should be automatic
notification at the end of investigations, along the lines of:
"Dear Sir, your data were involved in an investigation.  You were
found to have been innocent/unrelated.  Your data have now been
destroyed."

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [6] Q&A session with the above speakers
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Simon Watkin mentioned that the Home Secretary can issue a certificate
under s28 of the DPA that data are required for an investigation and
that this should be sufficient under English law.

Prof Korff disagreed and doesn't believe in magic Home Sec certificates
and he believes judges will still need to agree on ~specific~,
non-abstract proportionality.

Caspar Bowden asked Simon Watkin about blanket retention.  Can s28
DPA certs survive a legal challenge.  Also, how can the public have
confidence in Sir Swinton Thomas's technical competence if he remains
so elusive?

Simon Watkin mentioned the pre-ATSCA discussions about voluntary data
retention schemes.  He implied that these might still be under
discussion.

Someone agreed about the need for Sir Swinton Thomas to raise his
public profile, pticly as someone asked [in all seriousness, I think]
if he actually exists at all.  's worth reading PI's correspondence
with him : http://makeashorterlink.com/?U1FC21794 , where he appears
to be stonewalling -- pticly over how Secretaries of State authorise
interception warrants.  Sir Swinton seemed indignant that they're not
rubberstamped, yet how much time can Blunkett really spend on them?

Ross Anderson: In many countries, expired interception warrants are
disclosed to the subject, in countries as varied as US and NL.  What's
the govt's opinion?  [I need to remember to ensure this point is raised
in our response]

Simon Watkins mentioned that this was included in the consultation.
He raised the issue of "would you want to know if some wrong number
you'd received had ended up hooking you into some investigation?" and
seemed surprised that most people in the room couldn't understand why
people ~wouldn't~ want to know.

The Information Commissioner is waiting for the results of this
retention debate before tackling the uncertainty in the current
preservation rqmts on business.  Someone [I'm pretty sure this was
a guy speaking for the Office of the Information Commissioner, but I
didn't catch his name] raised that it might be the case, under contract
law, that BT bills could be challenged up to six ~years~ after billing,
which would imply six years of data preservation, which is surely
ridiculous and should be tightened up!

Prof Korff suggests that idea [viz six years] is patently rubbish and
should be the subject of a popular campaign [that's us!] asking people
to swear to their service provider that they won't contest their bills
and, so, can the service provider destroy the records now, please, as
there's no longer a legitimate reason to keep them.  This could be
backed up by a subsequent Subject Access Request under the DPA, to
check it's been done.  Email wouldn't be any good for this, as it's
not sufficiently legally binding [and I wouldn't wanna explain even
to someone from BT Trustwise that something was signed well enough
under the foolish provisions of s7(3) of the Electronic Communications
Act 2000, qv http://www.faxyourmp.com/q_a.php3#digitalsig ], but this
would all prevent a CSP from suggestion data retention was still just
data preservation.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [7] Legality of retention
 Dan Cooper, Covington & Burling
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Dan argued the new retention framework violates Art 8 and goes against
the norms of Data Protection and privacy.

The Framework decision ("on retention of traffic data...") calls for
mandatory data retention for between 12 and 24 motnhs.  Source,
destination, time, subscriber and comms device used would be kept for
any communication.

Possibility of challenging the legality of this under ECHR Art 8, EU
Charter and Title 6 of the EU Treaty.

This issue hasn't been addressed before as, previously, LEAs have
traditionally held the [wiretap] data and, thus, dealt with issues
around access and retention themselves.

Wiretap and phone meter data judgement caselaw do suggest that Art 8
protections would cover the extrapolations under RIP and ATCSA.

Foreseeability [I'm not quite sure I understood this, so the notes may
be a little sketchy].  Monitoring and surveillance laws have to protect
certain classes of privileged comms (lawyers' conversations with their
clients, for example).  Overbroad surveillance that interferes with
that (or with unrelated third parties, for example) must take this into
account.  An example Dan gave would be where a lawyer's spouse might be
under surveillance, but some of the lawyer's client conversations might
also get hoovered up.

This foreseeability will run against data retention, not least because
retention is always going to be broad-based.  Ignoring this would
require a change in the jurisprudence of the European Court.

Necessary in a democratic society.  This means that measures would
require there to have been a pressing social need, such as the change
in the nature of the world since the advent of popular use of the Net.

Summarising, under the European Court's jurisprudence, the Data
Retention Directive -- and any national law based thereupon, enabling
a priori data retention, would be challengable under Article 8 of the
ECHR, guaranteeing our right to privacy.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [8] Technical and economic feasibility
 Roland Perry, LINX
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

How easy is it to store these [meta]data?  Do CSPs log the data?  Not
always, the CLID of a DUN connexion to a RADIUS server won't
necessarily be logged by all ISPs.  Actions might be taken upon it at
the time (like dropping calls from a persistant dialup abuser), but
the metadata prolly aren't logged.

The Data Retention Directive mentions data "required to process a call"
What is that?  Email From: headers aren't ~required~ to send the mail.

Period of storage should reflect the business purpose (and staying
friendly with the police isn't a legitimate business purpose  :o)

What do CSPs charge?  They're only allowed cost recovery.  Some LEAs
are quite keen to verify that's all they're being billed.  Some CSPs
don't charge or just charge a token sum.  Roland believes all CSPs
run these processes at a loss.

Cost of retention?  If we only have data preservation, the cost
increase is nil.  Once LEAs know the data are there, though, the costs
of disclosure would increase.  If the law changes to increase the
data retention time, the costs would depend on the scalability of
existing archival systems, if they even exist.

Roland estimates £1 (one pound) per annum, per subscriber for
retention.  Disclosure, of course, must be in the tens of pounds, at
least.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [9] The European landscape
 Tony Bunyan, Statewatch
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

EU Charter of Fundamental Rights is included in Giscard d'Éstaing's
Constitutional Convention.

Nine, of the 15 states in the EU, are introducing Data Retention laws.
Only two are opposed.  Éire is insisting on three years' retention,
at the top of the scale.  Accession countries will have to abide by
existing practices [or something].  Of course, once most countries have
retention laws, the evangelists for them can insist on harmonistion of
EU national laws to enforce retention on the detractors (and acceding
countries, subsequently).

Remember the old Cold War arguments, though.  The bad things about
the Soviet Bloc, we were told, were that their freedom of movement was
impeded by surveillance (both within and without the Bloc) and that
there was wholesale surveillance of citizens.  Compare and contrast
with the Genoa protestors being monitored by the Schengen Information
System.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [a] Purposes of data retention
 Richard Clayton, FIPR
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Slides are online at http://www.fipr.org/sfs6/clayton.ppt and
http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~rnc1/talks/030514-DataRetention.pdf
[Richard has mailed me to point out the PPT might disappear at some
point, but the PDF will be there forevermore.]

Normal policing needs only recent data -- data still around at the time
of the initial investigation: "Please keep these data, now we're
investigating $badguy"

Some policing is now wanting to look at older data, to investigate
the criminal planning stage.

Lots of great slides with information about numbers.  Some I jotted
down:

Customs and Excise (for January to March 2000): 18.940 requests
(mainly RDQs).  3% (568 Nº) billing data; 0,3% (57 Nº) "other".
~1515 requests per major operation.

Met Police (2001): 127.000 requests

Scottish Drug Enforcement Agcy (who don't just do drugs but do major
crime stuff too) (for 2001): 73 criminal enterprises "disrupted".
174 arrests by 160 officers.  54.000 "subscriber data" requests
(740 per criminal network). 300 "itemised call records" (4 per netwk).
1000 "traffic data".

Food Standards Agency: 66 relevant enqs, 100 uses of comms data.

DTI CIB & Legal Svcs Directorate: ~100 enqs, 200 uses.

Radiocommunications Agency: ~25 enqs, 400 uses.

HO IND: 24 investigations of organised crime, ~1200 reqs (~50 per
investigation)

Information Commissioner: 109 investigations, 52 subscriber checks, 36
itemised records.

Serious Fraud Office: 40 accesses per annum.

999 calls
 - Coastguard says 112 "interrupted calls" per annum
 - Hoax calls:
   - Ambulance Svc work with the cops, no data.
   - Fire Service: 75.000 hoaxes (disproportionately in Scotland)
     4.400 investigated as arson, 85 prosecutions requiring comms
     data access for hoaxes
   - Coastguard: 206 hoaxes.

DEFRA: 12 accesses per annum

Medical Devices Agency: 20 per annum

NI NHS Counterfraud Agcy: 10 per annum [?]

Conclusion: some agencies are so low volume that they will never become
accustomed and accomplished at using the system and the forms.  Such
agencies will never have experienced SPoCs.  Much better to get the
cops to help them with their investigations, pticly with understanding
and interpreting the acquired metadata.

More common themes:
 - Agencies need to get and use the call mapping tools
 - Cops don't care about helping, as it's not their priority
 - Telcos don't care, when they use their DPA discretion to refuse
   access requests, there is rarely a court order insisting upon it,
   even with some 999 "life-threatening" cases => it can't've been
   ~that~ important, surely?

 - There's a public interest issue to consider the efficiancy of our
   regulators, if they can't use acquired comms data well, might their
   other techniques suck too? [my words, not Richard's!]

 - Importantly, who do we, as a society, want to enforce our laws?
   Might we be better served by getting the cops to do everything,
   using the expertise of these other agencies when required?

 - Interrupted 999 calls are a special case (though hoaxes prolly
   aren't)

 - There's a HUGE lack of dsata here about what these public svcs
   are spending our tax money on in their investigations.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
 [b] Q&A session with the second set of speakers
:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Forensic quality of data is pure.  Email logs (etc) really aren't
kept in forensic circumstances; someone with root can just edit the
damn things!

Even the US aren't going for data retention, but favoring data
preservation, as they've had such a régime for a while.  Remember, on
September 12, 2001, all UK ISPs were asked to preserve their existing
data for a month, which was renewed each month until Jan 2002 and
worked really well.  This would suggest that a preservation régime
might well be good enough, despite the HO's protestations to the
contrary.

Richard Clayton suggested the APIG report was good background reading:
http://www.apig.org.uk/APIGreport.pdf

[ends]

